#Economics Concept Questions
H2 Economics
Economics Concept Questions
Terms

4
Explain the effects of an increase in demand on equilibrium price and quantity, ceteris paribus
[DRAW DIAGRAM] An increase in demand causes a rightward shift in the demand curve (from DD0 to DD1).
At the current Price P0, the quantity demanded increases from Q0 to Q1, but the quantity supplied remains at Q0, causing a shortage of Q0Q1
The shortage exerts an upward pressure on price. The quantity demanded rises while the quantity supplied falls
Price adjustment process continues until the equilibrium price increases from P0 to P1, while equilibrium quantity increases from Q0 to Qe
4
Explain the effects of an increase in supply on equilibrium price and quantity, ceteris paribus
[DRAW DIAGRAM] An increase in demand causes a rightward shift in the supply curve (from DD0 to DD1).
At the current Price P0, the quantity supply increases from Q0 to Q1, but the quantity demanded remains at Q0, causing a surplus of Q0Q1
The shortage exerts an downward pressure on price. The quantity demanded rises while the quantity supplied falls
Price adjustment process continues until the equilibrium price decreases from P0 to P1, while equilibrium quantity increases from Q0 to Qe
1
What is the Price Elasticity of Demand (PED)
PED measures the responsiveness of quantity demanded of a good due to a change in price, ceteris paribus
2
Explain why Price Elasticities of Demand are Negative
PED measures the responsiveness of quantity demanded of a good due to a change in price, ceteris paribus
The Negative sign of the coefficient of the PED reflects the inverse relationship between price and quantity demanded, as stated by the law of demand.
1
What is Income Elasticity of Demand (YED)
YED measures the responsiveness of demand for a good due to a change in consumers' income, ceteris paribus.
1
What is Cross Elasticity of Demand (XED)
XED measures the responsiveness of the demand for a good due to changes in the price of another good, ceteris paribus
1
What is Price Elasticity of Supply (PES)
PES measures the responsiveness of quantity supplied of a good due to a change in the price of the good itself, ceteris paribus
4
Explain the likely effect of the fall in price on the total revenue for a good that is demand price elastic
As price changes, the quantity demanded changes more than proportionately.
[DRAW Diagram] Initial total revenue is (Area C+X), while the new total revenue is (Area C+Y)
As the loss in revenue, (area X), is smaller than the gain in total revenue, (area Y), 
The total revenue for a good rises as the price decreases
4
Explain the likely effect of the fall in price on the total revenue for a good that is demand price inelastic
As price changes, the quantity demanded changes less than proportionately.
[DRAW Diagram] Initial total revenue is (Area C+X), while the new total revenue is (Area C+Y)
As the loss in revenue, (area X), is larger than the gain in total revenue, (area Y), 
The total revenue for a good increases as the price decreases
6
How is the concept of price elasticity of demand (PED) useful to the firms
PED is useful to devise price strategies in the short run to maximise total expenditure
[GET DATA, eg. PED is > 1, demand is price elastic]
firms would need to increase the supply of products so that supply curve shifts from S0 to S1.
As a result, the equilibrium price of the product would fall from P0 to P1. 
This would result in a more than proportionate increase in quantity demanded for the product.
Thus, total expenditure would increase from Area (A+B) to Area (A+C). (Diagram)
0
