The Philippine government plans to lower income tax rates, slashing it from
32% to the mid-20s.
Source: CNBC, 2017
Explain what is involved in rational decision making for both consumers and
producers, and discuss how their decision making in response to the lowered
income tax rates will impact different product markets. [25]
2
AJC
Brick and mortar retailers of various goods and services, ranging from
groceries to luxury hand bags, have seen a fall in sales revenue in Singapore.
One possible reason is a fall in the cost of setting up online shopping
businesses.
Discuss possible demand and supply reasons that could account for the fall in
sales revenue of different brick and mortar retailers in Singapore. [25]
3
CJC
Brick-and-mortar travel agents are facing challenges with the proliferation of
online platforms like Zuji and the global economic slowdown. While some
brick-and-mortar travel agents are shutting down, others work to maintain their
relevance through apps and specialised services.
Discuss how the above events would affect the sales volume and revenue
earned by brick-and-mortar travel agents and online platforms like Zuji. [25]
4
DHS
Sugarcane, a water-intensive crop that takes 10 to 18 months to harvest, has
many uses. It can be made into sugar, a natural sweetener for food and
fermented to produce sugarcane ethanol, a biofuel for the transport sector. In
recent years, a number of developments have taken place in the Indian
sugarcane market. In addition to rising fertiliser costs, sugarcane crop suffered
from severe damage from a faltering monsoon in India. Amid India’s relatively
strong economic growth that encourages higher food consumption, the Indian
government has raised the minimum support price of sugarcane ethanol to
ensure its adequate supply.
Discuss the impact these events are likely to have had on consumer
expenditure on sugarcane and its related markets in India. [25]
5
HCI
"The use of drones for aerial photography and racing are growing in popularity
among the wider public. According to an industry report, in the next five years,
global consumer drone sales volume is expected to increase more than
tenfold, while average selling price for drones will continue to decline sharply.
Source: Dronelife, accessed 8 August 2017
Discuss the different demand and supply factors and their likely importance in
determining the anticipated changes in sales volume and price of consumer
drones. [25]
Nanyang Junior College (2019 H2 Economics Tutorial)
Chapters 4: Application of Demand & Supply
Page 4-9T6
IJC
Malaysia implemented a 6 per cent Goods and Services Tax (GST) in 2015 on
all goods and services except for staple food and some medicine.
Discuss the various impact of such a tax on consumption and production
decisions in various markets. [25]
7
JJC
Crude oil is an important commodity that is used to generate electricity, produce
gasoline and other petroleum products used for industrial production. Oil prices
have fallen from a peak of over $110 per barrel in 2014 to below $40 per barrel
in 2015.
Using examples from various industries, discuss why prices of oil-related
products fall to a different extent when there is a fall in the price of crude oil.
[25]
8
MJC
While mass-produced chocolate from manufacturers such as Hershey’s and
Mars can contain as little as 10% cocoa, artisan craft chocolate from small-
scale makers can contain more than 70% cocoa. The increase in price of
cocoa, a key ingredient in chocolate, has forced chocolate producers to either
increase its price or shrink its packaging.
(a) Explain the factors affecting the price elasticity of demand and cross
elasticity of demand for chocolate. [10]
(b) Discuss the factors that determine the significance of rising cocoa price on
the change in prices for different types of chocolate. [15]
9
MI
As urban populations swell, sand has become one of the most extracted
materials in the world. With extensive use in construction and industrial
production, existing sand deposits are being depleted. As such, some countries
have closed mines and banned exports. At the same time, prices of alternative
products such as wood have fallen.
Discuss the demand and supply factors and their relative importance in
determining the output of sand in the global market. [25]
10
NJC
Mobile devices such as smartphones are available in different models. The
recovery of the global economy and the rise in labour cost are likely to affect
the sales of various models of smartphones in different ways.
(a) Explain how elasticities of demand can assist in understanding the effect of
each of these changes on the sales volume of different models of
smartphones. [10]
(b) Assess the likely combined impact of both of these changes on the revenue
earned from the sale of different models of smartphones. [15]
Nanyang Junior College (2019 H2 Economics Tutorial)

Restaurant owners are now crying woes in Singapore as their profit margin has
been hit hard due to rising rental and food costs. However, their most pressing
issue is the lack of manpower and to make things worse, consumers are now
tightening their belts due to the negative growth rate for the first quarter of the
year. But not all hope is lost. With the rise of online food delivery services,
restaurants owners are now partnering them in the hope of attracting more
customers.
(a) Explain, using examples, the concepts of price elasticity of demand and
income elasticity of demand. [10]
(b) Discuss how the combination of the above factors affect the market for
different types of restaurant services in Singapore. [15]
12
PJC
Oil prices have fallen after the OPEC group of oil producing nations said global
crude stocks had risen coupled with Saudi Arabia's production increasing to
10.011 million barrels per day from 9.748 million barrels per day. In addition, a
weaker economic outlook means demand for oil in 2017 is likely to grow at a
slower rate.
Discuss how the above events are likely to impact the market for oil and its
related markets. [25]
13
RI
Meal delivery fever has hit Singapore, with companies like Uber and Grab
announcing their move into the food delivery market to join the likes of
Deliveroo and FoodPanda. Analysts are optimistic about this industry, given
Singapore’s steady economic growth and the downtrend of petrol prices.
Consumers will now be spoilt for choice as they no longer have to dine in at
hawker centers and restaurant.
Source: Channel News Asia 2016
(a) Explain the possible reasons for the rapid growth of the market for delivered
food. [10]
(b) Assess how related markets might be affected by these developments. [15]
14
RVHS
Just a year ago, anticipation of higher profits prompted cattle farmers in the
European Union (EU) to switch to produce dairy, a major ingredient of many
dairy-based products such as cheese. At the same time, the EU abolished dairy
production quotas while China, a key importer of EU products, saw slower
economic growth.
The Economist, August 2015
Using economic analysis, discuss the impact these events are likely to have
had on EU consumers and farmers. [25]
15
SAJC
Global sugar prices have rocketed 30% since April as supply lags further
behind demand.
Rabobank Sugar Quarterly, 2016
Using demand-supply analysis, explain the possible factors that led to the
above outcome and evaluate the relative importance of those factors. [25]
Nanyang Junior College (2019 H2 Economics Tutorial)
Chapters 4: Application of Demand & Supply
Page 4-11T16
SRJC
Organic food products such as fresh fruits and vegetables are grown without
synthetic pesticides, chemical fertilizers or genetically modified seeds. 2015
was a year of significant growth for the organic food industry despite the
continued struggle to meet the seemingly unquenchable consumer demand.
There was also an increase in the number of farmers converting to organic
farming over time.
Source: Organic Trade Association
Discuss the demand and supply factors that determine the output of organic
food products and evaluate which is the most important factor. [25]
17
TJC
Malaysia will begin imposing its tourism tax from Aug 1 this year, according to
details published on the Royal Malaysian Customs Department's website. Rates
start from RM2.50 per room each night at a non-rated accommodation to RM20
per room each night at a five-star accommodation.
Source: Channelnewsasia.com, 2017
(a) Explain how the imposition of the tax might affect consumers’ expenditure
and producers’ revenue for different types of hotels in Malaysia. [10]
(b) Discuss the factors the Malaysian government might have considered
before deciding to impose the tourism tax. [15]
18
TPJC
Water is a necessity. Across the globe, countries are working to supply drinking
water to its people, through taps or subsidising bottled water. However, there
are increasing calls for government to tax bottled water instead, since these
plastics are not biodegradable and cause pollution.
Brand of Natural Mineral Water (500 ML) Retailer/Country Price (SGD)
Volvic NTUC/Singapore $1.50
Evian Giant/Singapore $1.75
Suisai no mori Epermarket/China $3.05
Volvic Tesco/UK $0.89
Accessed on: Various websites, 10 July 2017
Discuss the possible reasons why prices of bottled water differ across firms and
countries. [25]
19
VJC
The global airline industry, as measured by revenue, has continued to grow
rapidly.
Discuss possible demand and supply factors and their relative importance in
explaining the reported increase in revenue earned by the airline industry. [25]
20
YJC
In the past few years there have been weak economic activities worldwide and
increased activities to produce oil.
Discuss the impact these events are likely to have on consumers and producers
in the markets for oil and alternative energy. [25]
